---
layout: post
title:  "LibreIdP: An Open-source, Pluggable Identity Provider"
date:   2022-08-13 18:00:28 -0500
categories: server
---

Any halfway decent Single Sign-On (SSO) infrastructure is extensible--that is
to say, it gives application developers the freedom to integrate with tools,
libraries and authentication mechanisms that enable them to protect the
end-user. Moreover, this is something that application developers expect, as
well. If I'm developing a budgeting application (coincidentally, I am), I want
to have the freedom to select OpenID Connect with Json Web Tokens and OAuth2
as my Auth/Auth suite. It should be easy for any user to deploy my application
and support this suite of mechanisms for authenticating their users.

The sad reality, however, is that we don't have that freedom, and it isn't
easy. There's a myriad of authentication and authorization solutions out there,
and luckily, many application developers have responded by making
authentication pluggable on their end--but that solution also has its
drawbacks. For example, OIDC is radically different in principle from LDAP, so
an application that supports plugins for one may not be able to support plugins
for the other (see the case of
[Jellyfin](https://features.jellyfin.org/posts/230/support-for-oidc)).

While I _do_ think that it should be the responsibility of application
developers to provide pluggable solutions that enable end-users the ability to
use Multi-Factor Authentication, or other schemes, it should first and foremost
be the responsibility of the _hosting provider_ to support whatever schemes an
application may require.

## LibreIdP

Enter LibreIdP. This application is founded on the following principles:

1. Authentication and authorization shall be completely implemented by plugins,
   with documented interfaces.
2. The user shall be able to configure the application with plaintext files,
   and supported configuration options are fully documented.

## A Trivial Use Case

The most trivial use case I'd like to support is integration with the Nginx
`http_auth_request` module. In the case where the user is not already
authenticated, a request to a protected resource (`/path`) may look like this:

{% plantuml %}
User -> Nginx: GET /page
Nginx -> LibreIdP: Proxy Subrequest
LibreIdP -> Backend: Auth Challenge
Backend -> LibreIdP: Challenge Result (FAIL)
LibreIdP -> Nginx: 401 Unauthorized\nWWW-Authenticate: /auth
Nginx -> User: 401 Unauthorized\nWWW-Authenticate: /auth
{% endplantuml %}

LibreIdP would provide the URL to an authentication form in the value of the
`WWW-Authenticate` header, and the user's browser should automatically redirect
them to this page.

{% plantuml %}
User -> Nginx: POST /auth
Nginx -> LibreIdP: POST /auth
LibreIdP -> Backend: Auth Challenge
Backend -> LibreIdP: Challenge Result (OK)
LibreIdP -> Nginx: 200 OK\nSet-Cookie
Nginx -> User: 200 OK\nSet-Cookie
{% endplantuml %}

Upon hitting "Submit", receive an authentication cookie that can be provided
for future requests:

{% plantuml %}
User -> Nginx: GET /page\nCookie: auth=<token>
Nginx -> LibreIdP: Proxy Subrequest
LibreIdP -> Backend: Auth Challenge
Backend -> LibreIdP: Challenge Result (OK)
LibreIdP -> Nginx: 200 OK
Nginx -> Application: GET /page
Application -> Nginx: 200 OK
Nginx -> User: 200 OK
{% endplantuml %}

## Design

In this case, LibreIdP has four responsibilities:

1. Receive HTTP requests from Nginx, and provide HTTP responses based on the
   result of any authentication challenges
2. Proxy authentication/authorization challenges to a backend (could be LDAP,
   could be PAM, could be polkit, could be anything)
3. Set (and later verify) that an HTTP cookie indicates valid credentials
4. Provide a frontend as a means of submitting authentication credentials

For the sake of conversation, lets now assume that the "backend" is going to
proxy authentication challenges to an OpenLDAP server. Each of these four
responsibilities is distinct from one another, and so we can model these as
four separate components:

{% plantuml %}
[NginxHttpFrontend] as frontend
[LdapProxy] as backend
[WebLoginFrontend] as form
[JwtSession] as cookie

package "LibreIdP" {
    () HttpSessionManager
    () WebLogin
    () AuthBackend
    () HttpFrontend
}

frontend -- HttpFrontend
backend -- AuthBackend
form -- WebLogin
cookie -- HttpSessionManager

frontend ..> AuthBackend: use
frontend ..> WebLogin: use
frontend ..> HttpSessionManager: use
{% endplantuml %}

In this case, all interfaces are provided as part of LibreIdP, but each of the
individual components could be a separate plugin. Additionally, this is only
a single use case. What about applications that need to rely on vendor-specific
MFA solutions, or other protocols like OpenID Connect? What if we're
integrating with an existing Kerberos deployment, or a RADIUS server? Each of
these scenarios would have to come with its own set of supported plugins. Now
that I've covered the basics of the goals and design philosophies behind
LibreIdP, in my next post, I'll begin talking about the implementation that
will fulfill these requirements.
